highly respected institutions. Muslim, Hindu and Presbyterian children excel at all levels,
and they dominate the professions of law, medicine, engineering and computer science.
Hinduism was the dominant religion of the immigrants, and Islam accounted for a lesser
percentage. But over time, Christianity has made significant inroads into the Hindu
heartland. In 1868, Canadian missionary Rev. John Morton founded the Canadian
Presbyterian Mission for the purpose of converting immigrants to the Christian fold.
During the 1980s, the baton for conversion was taken over by the Pentecostal/Evangelical
movement. Today, both the Presbyterian and Pentecostal churches count Indians in
significant numbers among their believers.

In the whole Diaspora, individual efforts of the Hindu community have confirmed
Trinidad’s place on the world pilgrimage map. In central Trinidad, devotees of the
Dattatreya Yoga Centre consecrated an 85-foot/25 metre murti|statue| of Lord Hanuman.
This astonishing achievement is unmatched in the Western hemisphere and is a first for
Trinidad and Tobago. The soaring marble murti of the Hindu Monkey God is intended to
symbolize the tower of strength that is the Hindu faith. By its height, the world was
signaled a message that the Hindu spirit is indomitable and would grow to meet any
obstacle. The unveiling was attended by the country’s Prime Minister and President and
many other national figures who, over time, have come to recognize and respect the place
and space occupied by the Indian community.

Hindu women in the Diaspora have also mounted a serious challenge to their
male counterparts in almost every field. In July 2003, after generations of male
domination in the sphere of Ramayan recitation, a full panel of women narrated the
scriptural epic in verse and song. The panel consisted of Gita Ramsingh, Mayanti
Maharaj and Shakuntala Jangbahadoor, who are well-known for their cultural and
devotional activities. Such a formidable feminist gesture is a clear indication of the
strength of Indian women who refuse to be suppressed by the barriers of gender.

Indians have contributed a fair share to the region’s flora and fauna. Hindus in

particular, cultivate consecrated trees in sacred groves to protect the species from

destruction and extinction. Plants like the tulsi/basil (Ocimum sactum), neem (Azardiracta

indica) and papal/peepar/banyan (Figus religiosa) are cultivated near the jhandi (yard shrine)

as in situ germplasm preservation/collection centers to sustain individual and communal
